In this tutorial, we will create pause logic. We will stop the game by pressing any key.
Let's create an additional widget for the pause mode and by pressing a button in the interface we will return
to the game mode. This functionality can be used
when calling settings to exit the game, and so on. Let's start by adding a key.
Go to project settings, to the input category and create an action mapping. Let's call it PauseGame. I assigned the "P" key.
Let's move on to the code. We will react to the key press in the playercontroller,
and not in the character, as before. So the pause will be available for us even if our character died.
Let's go to the base class playercontroller. Bind of input to playercontroller happens
in a special function called SetupInputComponent. The semantic load
of this function is the same as in the character class, the only difference is
that the playercontroller function does not have an InputComponent pointer parameter. This component is a member of the class,
so we can refer to it directly. We create a private section.
We declare a callback function that will be called when a key is pressed. Let's call it OnPauseGame.
We create the body of each of the functions in a .cpp file.
We call the parent function SetupInputComponent.
The class member pointer to the input component is named InputComponent.
If the component is zero, then exit the function.
And if not, then in the same way as we did in the character class, we call the BindAction function.
The first parameter is the name - PauseGame.
The second parameter InputEvent is IE_Pressed, the third is a pointer to the object and the fourth is the function that we want to call directly.
So, when you press the "P" key, the OnPauseGame functions will be called for us.
We need to pause our game. For this, GameMode has a special function
called SetPause. First, we check the game world and GameMode for nullptr.
If at least one of the given pointers is null, then we exit the function.
We include the header file of the base GameMode. Cast to our GameMode class is not needed
because the SetPause function is in the base class. Let's call her.
It takes two parameters. The first of which is a controller that wants to pause the game, and the second parameter
is a special kind of delegate that determines whether we can pause or not. We will not consider it.
Leave it as default. We can pause with the default value.
We need to override the SetPause function in our GameMode class, because besides the pause itself, we also want
to change the state of our match. Under the hood, in the SetPause function, the ticks of all actors are stopped.
We override the SetPause function in our class.
We create the body of the function.
When calling this function, we need to change MatchState to Pause.
Also note that the function has a boolean return value.
We can return the value that the parent SetPause function returns.
The only point: since the function returns a boolean value,
a situation is possible when a pause has not been set. We don't care about the implementation
details right now , but it is important to know that it can return either false or true,
so in order for the function that we have overridden to work one hundred percent correctly, let's create a
local variable into which we will pre-assign the value of the parent function.
And we will set a new MatchState only if a pause has been set.
Let's see what we got. We compile the project.
We start the game.
Press the P key. The game has stopped, the Tick function is not called for the actors. Let's make it so that instead of
the user interface, we have a special
pause widget shown . Create a new blueprint widget. We call it WBP_GamePause.
We open the asset.
Let's start with an element called a vertical box. There will be several elements in the widget. They will be grouped
in a vertical box. We set the anchor in the middle. Position to 0. Alignment to 0.5
SizeToContent to true. Add text to the box element.
In the text, we will display GamePause.
We make the size of the text larger. Let 's
say 100. Let's make this widget show when we press the P key.
Let's create a widget in GameHUD that will be responsible for pause. Add a new property. We call it PauseWidgetClass.
In total, we will have 3 widgets: PlayerHUD, Pause and also a GameOver widget, where we will
display statistics. We will use the TMap associative array to store all the widgets.
The key type will be MatchState.
The value type is a pointer to UserWidget.
Let's call the variable GameWidgets.
We also need an additional variable of the UUserWidget type, which will store a
pointer to the current Wdiget. Let's call this variable CurrentWidget.
By default, we will assign the value nullptr.
Go to the .cpp file.
In the BeginPlay function, the PlayerHUDWidget is already created. It is necessary to unify the logic for
creating widgets. For this we will use our GameWidgets associative array.
We call the Add function, which adds a key-value pair to the TMap. The widget that will be shown
during the game, that is, in the InProgress state, is the PlayerHUDWidget, so the pointer
returned by the CreateWidget function is passed as the second parameter to the Add function.
Copy the line. Let's add a second pair. The next state is pause. For this state, we have to create a
widget from the PauseWidgetClass. So, we have created two widgets, added to our associative array.
Now we can in a loop add each of the created widgets to the viewport. To do this, we create a range loop.
Each of the TMap elements has a special type called TPair. This is a special
template that stores a key and a value. Create a local variable GameWidget,
into which we assign directly a value, that is, a raw pointer to the UserWidget.
Let's check the given pointer to nullptr.
If it is zero, then we call the continue operator.
If not zero, then we call the AddToViewport function. Thus, in the BeginPlay function we add all the widgets to the viewport
and after that we need to make each widget invisible. To do this, you can
call a widget function called SetVisibility. The function has one parameter, which is an enum of
type ESlateVisibility. We could see the value of this enum in the blueprint of the widget.
We need to select the value Hidden, that is, hidden.
So, we have created all the widgets. Added to viewport and made them invisible. You can remove the PlayerHUDWidget creation code.
We no longer need it, and now every time our MatchState changes,
we need to include a widget that corresponds to this state. Let's go to the OnMatchStateChanged function.
We've created an additional pointer called CurrentWidget. This pointer will
hold the currently visible widget. Therefore, first we check: if CurrentWidget is non-zero, then we
need to set the visibility of the current widget to Hidden. The very first time this code will
not be executed , because our CurrentWidget is zero by default. After that, you need to check if
an element with the State key exists in our associative array. To do this, TMap has a Contains function
that returns true if an element with the given key exists, for example, we have
not added a widget for the GameOver state now, so if we try to get values ​​with the GameOver key,
we will get an error. If an element with a State key exists, then we set the CurrentWidget
pointer to the value of this element. To do this, we will use the parenthesis operator []
and after that we need to make the changed CurrentWidget visible. To do this,
pass the ESlateVisibility :: Visible element to the SetVisibility function of the widget. Let's see how it works. We compile the project.
In the GameHUD blueprint, specify PauseWidgetClass - WBP_GamePause. We launch the project. Press the P key.
PlayerHUDWidget has become invisible, and the pause widget is displayed.
We continue with the widget. We need to add a button, when clicking on which we will have a pause to remove.
Find an element called Button. Add it to the vertical box.
We have it stretched along the entire length of the vertical box. We can change the alignment. Center:
horizontally and vertically. We'll also add a Spacer element to slightly defuse the space
between the title and the button. Let there be 40 units in Y. There are several ways to
resize an element in layout. One of them is to put it in a special container
called SizeBox. Right-click. Choose WrapWith SizeBox. In the details panel
there are properties that can override the size. In WidthOverride, you can override the
width of the button, and HeightOverride override the height of the button. Let's also add a text element.
Make the text a child of the button. Let's enter the text continue.
Let's change the style of the button. We select it in the tree. Open the style category.
Change the Tint for the Normal state to red. Change the color on hover. To do this, in the Hovered state
, change the Tint to black, you can also change the Pressed state - this is the state
when the button is pressed. You can simply copy the red color from the Normal state.
Compile. Let's start the game. Click on P. A button appeared. The cursor is not shown for us.
If we press shift + f1, then we can deliver the cursor. When you hover over the button, we see how its states change.
Our next task is to show the cursor when we have entered the pause state and, when we click on the button,
return Tick to all actors. Let's create a basic C ++ class for the pause widget.
And we will program all the logic we need in this widget.
We call it STUPauseWidget.
Click on the Create Class button. The widget class has been created. We declare the Initialize function.
We need a button UI element. To do this, create a protected section.
Add the UPROPERTY macro. For property, you need to specify special meta information that will associate the button
that is in the blueprint with the button that we
will use in C ++. The specifier is called BindWidget.
The class responsible for the button is called UButton.
Let's call the button ClearPauseButton.
You also need to make a forward declaration of this class.
We create a private section. We need a callback function that will be called when the button is pressed.
The delegate we will subscribe to is dynamic, so we add the UFUNCTION macro.
We call the function OnClearPause. We create a body for each function.
We need a header file for the base class GameMode.
And also the header file of the button. It is located at Components / Button.h
Let's go to the Initialize function. So little mistake: it has a boolean return value. Let's change. We need to call the parent
Initialize function before calling the button, otherwise the pointer to the UButton will be null.
Therefore, we will store the return value of Initialize in the local variable InitStatus.
We check that our button exists.
If everything is ok, then we can subscribe to the delegate, which is called when we click on the button. The delegate is called OnClicked.
There are several delegates. There is a delegate OnPressed, OnReleased, OnHovered, and so on.
We call AddDynamic. The first parameter is this, a pointer to the current object, and the second parameter is a reference
to the object's function. We pass OnClearPause there. Thus, when the ClearPauseButton button
is pressed, the OnClearPause function will be called, where the main logic will be. And at the end of the function, add a return statement.
And we return the value of the InitStatus variable.
Let's go to the OnClearPause function.
First, we need to check the pointers to the world and to the game mode.
If the pointers are nonzero, then we call the game mode function called ClearPause.
This function is the opposite of the SetPause function. It runs Tick functions for all actors.
In our game mode, it also needs to be overridden, because we need to change the state of the match.
Add the function to the STUGameModeBase header file.
We create the body of the function.
ClearPause also returns a boolean value, so we'll do the same for SetPause.
Let's create an additional PauseCleared variable. Let's assign it the value of the parent ClearPause function.
If the value PauseCleared = true, then we change the state of our match to InProgress.
And at the very end, we return the PauseCleared value. We figured out the reset of the pause.
The last thing to do is to display the mouse cursor in the paused state. We will do this in playercontroller.
To do this, we will redefine the BeginPlay function, in which we will also subscribe to changing the game state.
And in case of a pause, we will show the cursor. We also need a callback function
that will be called when the game state changes. We created exactly the same one in GameHUD.
Let's include the STUCoreTypes header file so that ESTUMatchState is available.
We create the body of the BeginPlay function.
We can simply copy the code from the GameHUD that subscribes
to the OnMatchStateChanged delegate. Now we need the STUGameModeBase header file.
Therefore, we can replace the GameModeBase header file with STUGameModeBase.
We change the class of the function we are adding.
We can also copy the body of the OnMatchStateChanged function.
The controller is now subscribed to the MatchState change too. Therefore, when the state changes, we can check:
if the current state = InProgress, that is, we are in the game, then the cursor does not need to be shown.
The Boolean variable in the controller that is responsible for showing the cursor is called bShowMouseCursor.
We set it to false, and in all other states the cursor will be shown. That is, in the case of a pause,
we show the cursor and will also show it in the case of the GameOver state, which we will
consider a little later in this section. That is, in our particular game, everything is quite simple with this.
Let's check. We compile the project.
For our blueprint widget, let's change the base class (file -> reparent blueprint). Find STUPauseWidget. We select it.
And we have a widget compilation error. The Compile Result displays a message that the button that
we created in C ++ СlearPauseButton was not found in this blueprint. So how, if we
declare any UI element in C ++ and specify the BindWidget meta information in the property,
we must have an element with the given name in the widget. Therefore, we rename the button to ClearPauseButton
and the compilation was successful. We start the game. Press "P".
The cursor is available, but we can see that mouse hover events are not firing. We need to explicitly
click in the viewport. When you press the button, the pause is removed, but the cursor is visible and we additionally
need to click to return control to the character. We also need to correct this.
We will not consider the detailed work of the input system in the UE - this is a separate topic for conversation.
To explicitly specify the type of input, you can use the playercontroller function
called SetInputMode. It has one parameter. The type of the FInputModeDataBase parameter.
There are several data structures that inherit from the base structure.
Each of them is responsible for a specific input. GameAndUI, GameOnly and UIOnly. When the match is in the InProgress state,
we pass an object of the FInputModeGameOnly structure as a parameter,
and in all other cases we pass an object of the FInputModeUIOnly type.
We compile the project.
Checking. Press "P". The input method is set UI. The button immediately changes its state on hover,
when you click on Continue, the control returns to the character immediately without an additional click. Everything is working.
Let's add an additional decorative element to the widget called BackgroundBlur. This is a postprocessing effect.
Blur effect. We add it to the CanvasPanel, at the very bottom level.
Stretch in width and height. Offset is done by zeros. The main property of this element is BlurStrenght, that is, how much the
background is blurred. Let's put, for example, value = 4. Compile, run. Press "P".
The background is now blurred, thanks to this, all elements will be displayed more clearly. This concludes the lesson.